add airgap scenario for downstream-cluster (#317)
suse-edge/suse-edge.github.io: asciidoc/product/atip-automated-provision.adoc

The output image must then be made available via a webserver, either the media-server container enabled via the <<metal3-media-server,Management Cluster Documentation>>
or some other locally accessible server.  In the examples below, we refer to this server as `imagecache.local:8080`

[#eib-edge-image-airgap]
=== Prepare downstream cluster image for air-gap scenarios

<<components-eib, Edge Image Builder>> is used to prepare a modified SLEMicro base image which is provisioned on downstream cluster hosts.

> Much of the configuration via Edge Image Builder is possible, but in this guide, we cover the minimal configurations necessary to set up the downstream cluster for air-gap scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Much of the configuration is possible with Edge Image Builder, but in this guide, we cover the minimal configurations necessary to set up the downstream cluster for air-gap scenarios.
```

==== Prerequisites for air-gap scenarios

* A container runtime such as https://podman.io[Podman] or https://rancherdesktop.io[Rancher Desktop] is required to run Edge Image Builder.
* The base image `SLE-Micro.x86_64-5.5.0-Default-RT-GM.raw` must be downloaded from the https://scc.suse.com/[SUSE Customer Center] or the https://www.suse.com/download/sle-micro/[SUSE Download page].

> * If you want to use SR-IOV or any other workload which require a container image, a Local Private Registry must be deployed and already configured (with/without TLS and/or authentication). This registry will be used to store the images and the helm chart oci images.

Reviewer: Any specific reason to use upper case for this: "Local Private Registry" If not, then it needs to be a "local private registry"

==== Image configuration for air-gap scenarios

When running Edge Image Builder, a directory is mounted from the host, so it is necessary to create a directory structure to store the configuration files used to define the target image.

* `downstream-cluster-airgap-config.yaml` is the image definition file, see <<quickstart-eib>> for more details.
* The base image when downloaded is `xz` compressed, which must be uncompressed with `unxz` and copied/moved under the `base-images` folder.
* The `network` folder is optional, see <<add-network-eib>> for more details.
* The `custom/scripts` directory contains scripts to be run on first-boot; currently a `01-fix-growfs.sh` script is required to resize the OS root partition on deployment. For air-gap scenarios, a script `02-airgap.sh` is required to copy the images to the right place during the image creation process.

> * The `custom/files` directory contains the rke2 and the cni images to be copied to the image during the image creation process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `custom/files` directory contains the `rke2` and the `cni` images to be copied to the image during the image creation process.
```
OR
```suggestion
* The `custom/files` directory contains the RKE2 and the CNI images to be copied to the image during the image creation process.
```

Author: I prefer first one... Changed

[,console]
----
├── downstream-cluster-airgap-config.yaml
├── base-images/
│   └ SLE-Micro.x86_64-5.5.0-Default-RT-GM.raw
├── network/
|   └ configure-network.sh
└── custom/
    └ files/
    |   └ install.sh
    |   └ rke2-images-cilium.linux-amd64.tar.zst
    |   └ rke2-images-core.linux-amd64.tar.zst
    |   └ rke2-images-multus.linux-amd64.tar.zst
    |   └ rke2-images.linux-amd64.tar.zst
    |   └ rke2.linux-amd64.tar.zst
    |   └ sha256sum-amd64.txt
    └ scripts/
        └ 01-fix-growfs.sh
        └ 02-airgap.sh
----

===== Downstream cluster image definition file

> 

Reviewer: Is the downstream cluster image definition file different for air-gap and connected environments?

Author: yes It's the same, so I will change to make it a reference instead

    - net.ifnames=1
  systemd:
    disable:
      - rebootmgr
  users:
    - username: root
      encryptedPassword: ${ROOT_PASSWORD}
      sshKeys:
      - ${user1Key1}
  packages:
    packageList:
      - jq
      - dpdk22
      - dpdk22-tools
      - libdpdk-23
      - pf-bb-config
    additionalRepos:
      - url: https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/isv:/SUSE:/Edge:/Telco/SLEMicro5.5/
    sccRegistrationCode: ${SCC_REGISTRATION_CODE}
----

Where `$\{SCC_REGISTRATION_CODE\}` is the registration code copied from https://scc.suse.com/[SUSE Customer Center], and the package list contains the minimum packages to be used for the Telco profiles.
To use the `pf-bb-config` package (to enable the `FEC` feature and binding with drivers), the `additionalRepos` block must be included to add the `SUSE Edge Telco` repository.
For the production environments, it is recommended to use the SSH keys that can be added to the users block replacing the `$\{USERKEY1\}` with the real SSH keys.

[NOTE]
====
`net.ifnames=1` enables https://documentation.suse.com/smart/network/html/network-interface-predictable-naming/index.html[Predictable Network Interface Naming]

> This matches the default configuration for the metal3 chart, but the setting must match the configured chart `predictableNicNames` value.

Reviewer: is it metal3 or Metal^3^?

Author: removed with the previous comment

[,shell]
----
#!/bin/bash
growfs() {
  mnt="$1"
  dev="$(findmnt --fstab --target ${mnt} --evaluate --real --output SOURCE --noheadings)"
  # /dev/sda3 -> /dev/sda, /dev/nvme0n1p3 -> /dev/nvme0n1
  parent_dev="/dev/$(lsblk --nodeps -rno PKNAME "${dev}")"
  # Last number in the device name: /dev/nvme0n1p42 -> 42
  partnum="$(echo "${dev}" | sed 's/^.*[^0-9]\([0-9]\+\)$/\1/')"
  ret=0
  growpart "$parent_dev" "$partnum" || ret=$?
  [ $ret -eq 0 ] || [ $ret -eq 1 ] || exit 1
  /usr/lib/systemd/systemd-growfs "$mnt"
}
growfs /
----

===== Air-gap script

The following script (`custom/scripts/02-airgap.sh`) is required to copy the images to the right place during the image creation process:

[,shell]
----
#!/bin/bash

# create the folder to extract the artifacts there
mkdir -p /opt/rke2-artifacts
mkdir -p /var/lib/rancher/rke2/agent/images

# copy the artifacts
cp install.sh /opt/
cp rke2-images*.tar.zst rke2.linux-amd64.tar.gz sha256sum-amd64.txt /opt/rke2-artifacts/
----

===== Custom files for air-gap scenarios

> The `custom/files` directory contains the rke2 and the cni images to be copied to the image during the image creation process.

Reviewer: Suggestion: RKE2 and CNI or `rke2` and `cni`

> To generate easily the images you can prepare locally using following https://github.com/suse-edge/fleet-examples/blob/release-3.0/scripts/day2/edge-save-rke2-images.sh[script] and the list of images https://github.com/suse-edge/fleet-examples/blob/release-3.0/scripts/day2/edge-release-rke2-images.txt[here] to generate the artifacts required to be included in `custom/files`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To easily generate the images, prepare them locally using following https://github.com/suse-edge/fleet-examples/blob/release-3.0/scripts/day2/edge-save-rke2-images.sh[script] and the list of images https://github.com/suse-edge/fleet-examples/blob/release-3.0/scripts/day2/edge-release-rke2-images.txt[here] to generate the artifacts required to be included in `custom/files`.
```

> Also, you can download the latest rke2-install script from https://get.rke2.io/[here]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, you can download the latest `rke2-install` script from https://get.rke2.io/[here].
```

[,shell]
----
$ ./edge-save-rke2-images.sh -o custom/files -l ~/edge-release-rke2-images.txt
----

After downloading the images, the directory structure should look like this:

[,console]
----
└── custom/
    └ files/
        └ install.sh
        └ rke2-images-cilium.linux-amd64.tar.zst
        └ rke2-images-core.linux-amd64.tar.zst
        └ rke2-images-multus.linux-amd64.tar.zst
        └ rke2-images.linux-amd64.tar.zst
        └ rke2.linux-amd64.tar.zst
        └ sha256sum-amd64.txt
----

[#preload-private-registry]
===== Preload your private registry with images required for air-gap scenarios and SR-IOV (optional)

If you want to use SR-IOV in your air-gap scenario or any other workload images, you must preload your local private registry with the images following the next steps:

> * Download, extract and push the helm-chart oci images to the private registry.

Reviewer: Should it be `helm-chart oci` or `helm-chart` OCI or helm-chart OCI? 

Also, because you are using a bullet, remove the period (.) at the end of the sentence.

Author: helm-chart OCI (3rd option)

[#airgap-deployment]
=== Downstream cluster provisioning in air-gapped scenarios

The directed network provisioning workflow allows to automate the provisioning of downstream clusters in air-gapped scenarios.

==== Requirements for air-gapped scenarios

1. The `raw` image generated using `EIB` must include the specific container images (helm-chart oci and container images) required to run the downstream cluster in an air-gapped scenario. For more information, refer to xref:eib-edge-image-airgap[this section].

2. In case of using SR-IOV or any other custom workload, the images required to run the workloads must be preloaded in your private registry following the xref:preload-private-registry[preload private registry section].

==== Enroll the bare metal hosts in air-gap scenarios

The process to enroll the bare metal hosts in the management cluster is the same as described in the xref:enroll-bare-metal-host[previous section].

==== Provision the downstream cluster in air-gap scenarios

There are some important changes required to provision the downstream cluster in air-gapped scenarios:

> 1. The `RKE2ControlPlane` block in the `capi-provisioning-example.yaml` file must include the `spec.agentConfig.airGapped: true` directive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. The `RKE2ControlPlane` block in the `capi-provisioning-example.yaml` file must include the `spec.agentConfig.airGapped: true` directive.
```

> 2. The private registry configuration must be included in the `RKE2ControlPlane` block in the `capi-provisioning-airgap-example.yaml` file following the xref:atip-private-registry[private registry section].
> 
> 3. If you are using SR-IOV or any other `AdditionalUserData` configuration (combustion script) which requires the helm-chart installation, you must modify the content to reference the private registry instead of using the public registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. The private registry configuration must be included in the `RKE2ControlPlane` block in the `capi-provisioning-airgap-example.yaml` file following the xref:atip-private-registry[private registry section].

. If you are using SR-IOV or any other `AdditionalUserData` configuration (combustion script) which requires the helm-chart installation, you must modify the content to reference the private registry instead of using the public registry.
```

The following example shows the SR-IOV configuration in the `AdditionalUserData` block in the `capi-provisioning-airgap-example.yaml` file with the modifications required to reference the private registry

- Private Registry secrets references

> - Helm-Chart definition using the private registry instead of the public oci images.

Reviewer: Should OCI be oci or OCI?

Author: renamed all document with OCI
